(There in the hagahah) And some say we state chatichah na'asah nevelah in all issurim. And behold Ran wrote: and so most authors — that even per Rabbenu Tam's view that in other issurim we say chatichah na'asah nevelah, it is only d'rabbanan because of the taste of basar b'chalav. And it is difficult accordingly: that which Tosafot challenged in ch. 25 daf 100 s.v. keshekadim vesalku, etc., per Rabbenu Tam's explanation — how did they hag'alah the large yorot, since the water is noten ta'am, etc. — see there. And per what the commentators said, well they hag'alahed it from the Torah, and there is no chatichah na'asah nevelah at all in other issurim. And some want to resolve that certainly Tosafot also hold it is only d'rabbanan, and that which they challenged from the large yorah — this is since we find explicit permission in the Torah, the Sages would not forbid what the Torah explicitly permitted to the seeing eye — investigate. And in my humble opinion it appears thus: behold Tosafot challenged Rabbenu Tam's view from the large yorah — this is specifically per Rabbenu Tam who holds that only taste is d'oraisa up to sixty; if so, well one may say chatichah na'asah nevelah is forbidden from the Torah in all issurim; not so per Rabbenu Tam the Kohen who on the view of noten ta'am one is not lashed unless there is a kezayit in the time to eat a peras — if so, certainly for him chatichah na'asah nevelah is d'rabbanan; and we hold like R' Chaim Kohen who on taste one is not lashed — if so, certainly chatichah na'asah nevelah is d'rabbanan. [And as he wrote in his book Kereti uPeleti.] And one may say: Tosafot's challenge is even per R' Chaim Kohen — for even though he holds that for more than the time to eat a peras one is not lashed, nevertheless all this is in min b'mino; not so min b'mino according to Rav who holds min b'mino with any amount — nevertheless we certainly say chatichah na'asah nevelah according to all — and if so Tosafot challenged well: if so in hag'alah of the law too there is concern lest he used it on a day of wine offered to idolatry, which is min b'mino with hag'alah, and we say each time chatichah na'asah nevelah. And it is fine per R' Eliezer's view who holds we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah in other issurim — if so, well they could hag'alah the water of issur absorbed in vessels: a quarter-log of water and the vessel holds thirty zayitim — if so, if they hag'alah it the first time and the water removed the issur and it was absorbed afterward in the vessel — if so it only absorbed a thirtieth of a zayit of issur; for even though what is absorbed now is also a zayit like what was first absorbed, nevertheless since it fell into hag'alah water and returns and absorbs from hag'alah water, it is absorption for the view that parts of the permitted water and one part of issur — if so when hag'alahed a second time there is no noten ta'am at all in the second hag'alah water, only the second hag'alah water is forbidden in any amount, which is the second hag'alah water that is also boiling; and if the vessel holds less than that, such that even in the second hag'alah there is noten ta'am in the water — hag'alah three times, and each time according to the size of what was absorbed and the smallness of the vessel's capacity — increase hag'ala until what was absorbed remains without noten ta'am. Not so Rabbenu Tam who holds chatichah na'asah nevelah also in other issurim — if so when the water was first forbidden up to noten ta'am the water became nevelah; if so even if they hag'alahed a hundred times it does not help, for each time we say in it chatichah na'asah nevelah, and each time what is absorbed absorbs a kezayit of issur as before, since there is no sixty at all in hag'alah water against what was absorbed from it, and the water becomes like issur of nevelah — if so Tosafot challenged well according to Rav who holds min b'mino in any amount — investigate well. [Hagahah of the great Rav, etc., R' Shlomo Kohen, may his light shine, first chapter Vilna. The Gaon's words here are astonishing in my humble opinion, for the matter is plain that min b'mino according to Rav, even though it is from the Torah — for we derive from "and he shall take" the blood of the bull and the blood of the goat — nevertheless lashes certainly do not apply as long as there is no kezayit in the time to eat a peras, for it is no greater than min in not its species; for us, for R' Chaim Kohen there are no lashes on taste, and since min in not its species for us chatichah na'asah nevelah is only d'rabbanan, as written above in name of Peleti — per Rabbenu Tam's view it is plain that the same applies to min b'mino according to Rav; if so necessarily Tosafot's challenge is only to Rabbenu Tam, as Peleti concludes. And incidentally, since we deal with the law of chatichah na'asah nevelah, I saw fit to write on what Peri Megadim was uncertain in Mishbetzot Zahav siman 100 s.k. 1 regarding things that forbid above sixty, such as chametz and spice, etc. — whether we say chatichah na'asah nevelah in them; and he wrote that from Rabbenu Tam's words in Tur siman 92 it is explained explicitly that we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah in a thing forbidden in any amount. However from Ran in ch. 25 who challenged there from that which we taught in the first chapter of Temurah that the diluted mixture does not return to dilute except by calculation, etc., and he needed to resolve that in dry in dry they did not say chatichah na'asah nevelah in other issurim because it is not similar to basar b'chalav — see there; in Ran it appears that in wet in wet, even above sixty, we say chatichah na'asah nevelah — so too Peri Megadim there. However in my humble opinion it appears one may say Ran follows his view that he holds chametz and spice and the like forbid from the Torah above sixty, as Peri Megadim wrote in siman 98 in Sha'ar HaTevunah s.k. 29 in his name, and so too there the Gra in the Yoreh De'ah margin — if so it is not less than other issurim that forbid up to sixty, regarding which they decreed chatichah na'asah nevelah because of the taste of basar b'chalav, as Ran wrote. But per what Shach wrote in siman 98 s.k. 29 in name of Issur VeHeter explicitly that it is only d'rabbanan — certainly one may say we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah in them; not to mention per Rambam and Mechaber in siman 90 regarding basar b'chalav itself where it is only d'rabbanan, such as milk of a slaughtered animal and the like, that we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah, as Taz wrote there per their view — how much more so in other d'rabbanan issurim or in a d'rabbanan mixture; but even for us who do not hold thus, nevertheless above sixty one may certainly say we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah, since the main reason we say chatichah na'asah nevelah in other issurim is because of the taste of meat and milk, and in basar b'chalav we do not find that it forbids above sixty from the Torah — and see Shach in this siman s.k. 15 what he wondered about Afiei Revavai. And in my humble opinion it appears Afiei Revavai follows Maharshal's view that Taz brought in s.k. 15: in other issurim themselves, that we say in wet in wet we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah — specifically when cold mixed with cold and there is no sixty; but hot in hot through cooking, where the issur gives wet taste in the heter — also in other issurim we say chatichah na'asah nevelah — see there. And per this, that which Rama wrote in the hagahah in basar b'chalav one may not rely on this — also cold in cold deals with it; if so, Afiei Revavai wrote well that it is only a d'rabbanan stringency, for from the Gemara that we say "it is nevelah milk" there is no proof at all, for there it is hot in hot and through taste that the piece imparted taste in milk — in such a case Afiei Revavai concedes it is forbidden from the Torah in basar b'chalav; but cold in cold one may well say that also in basar b'chalav it is only from stringency as above — to resolve Afiei Revavai's words. And so one must explain Darkei Moshe's words in siman 99 letter 2 in that which he wrote there to resolve Tur's words per Rashba's view in his responsum that he distinguishes and wrote: specifically if cold mixed with cold or dry with dry — then we say that if he increased upon them unintentionally they are permitted, etc. And it appears Tur wrote stam all issurim, etc., and it implies he deals even with basar b'chalav, as Darkei Moshe himself concludes there; and in basar b'chalav it is explained explicitly in the Gemara that even cold in cold chatichah na'asah nevelah is from the Torah, for we challenge "it is nevelah milk" — if so necessarily it deals with cold and cold. However in truth Tur's language there implies he deals with a hot dish into which issur fell — and then Darkei Moshe's explanation there cannot stand at all, and still requires study. End of hagahah of the great Rav, etc., R' Shlomo Kohen, may his light shine, first chapter Vilna.]
