(There) But if he did not manage [in time], etc. — forbidden unless there is sixty in it. One may say accordingly on that which is taught in Chullin 94: a pot in which he cooked meat — he may not cook milk in it; and if he cooked and there is noten ta'am, and we say: who tastes — kafeilah tastes for him. And per what the Mechaber wrote, why do we rely on kafeilah? Let us say milk was absorbed in the pot and noten ta'am and returned and discharged it and forbids the rest of the milk, and it is min b'mino with the rest of the milk and would require sixty as here. And one may say: behold Ran explains that which challenges on that which Rav said: a kezayit of meat fell into a cauldron of milk, etc. — it is nevelah milk; and Ran asks: why noten ta'am? For since this milk that was absorbed is still connected to this milk that is outside it, which is sixty against the taste of meat — the taste of meat that this absorbed milk received was nullified. And one may say: since it was absorbed inside the meat it is immediately separated from the rest of the milk and stands alone, and properly received meat taste and noten ta'am. And behold per what we hold: if issur was absorbed in food, the issur cannot be squeezed out, for the issur cannot discharge from it; but if issur was absorbed in a vessel we say hag'alah helps and the issur can properly separate from it — and this is the reason: in absorption in food the issur clings to it and adheres more and is absorbed literally in the substance until it cannot give space between the adhesions forever; not so in absorption in a vessel, which does not cling and adhere so much with the vessel, and therefore in hag'alah it can properly separate from it. Accordingly one may say that which we say: if something was absorbed into something else it is considered as separated from what is outside it — this is if absorbed into the food as above, and it is all one body, and we properly say it is as separating and noten ta'am; not so what clings in a vessel, which does not cling so much with the vessel — we say it is still connected to the food inside the vessel, and we do not say that since it was absorbed it is noten ta'am. Accordingly it works out [and so too Peri Megadim at the beginning of siman 94 in Sha'ar HaTevunah this distinction in name of Mordechai]: for here, which deals with absorption inside the vessel, we say noten ta'am and properly requires sixty; not so there regarding a pot in which he cooked, etc. — for since it was absorbed in the vessel we do not say it should be as separated from meat and be noten ta'am and need no sixty at all to nullify it. But still difficult is that which the Mechaber wrote above at the end of seif 4: if he placed [milk] in the hide of the stomach — if there is noten ta'am in it, it is forbidden; it implies if there is no noten ta'am it is permitted even when there is no sixty. Let us say the milk absorbed in the stomach hide is noten ta'am and returned and discharged and would need sixty to nullify — there too it was absorbed in food. And one must say: since it is only forbidden through pickling, and from the Torah it is not forbidden at all in basar b'chalav except through cooking — the Mechaber holds we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah, because he holds like Rabbenu Efraim that we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah except in basar b'chalav — and this is because since this alone is permitted, etc., only by their joining together it became forbidden — it is properly as one body of nevelah; and all this if forbidden through cooking, which is as a body of issur; not so through pickling and salting — even though they forbade eating, nevertheless we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah that the whole is considered one body, only it is considered like other issurim. [Hagahah: and so too in the Gra's chiddushim at the end of seif 7, that for Taz in siman 90 s.k. 4 that the Mechaber holds in basar b'chalav that is d'rabbanan we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah — it works out.]
