(Siman 92 seif 1) A kezayit of meat, etc. From that piece is forbidden — that which the Mechaber ruled without specification that that piece is forbidden implies even if kafeilah tastes it and says there is no milk taste, nevertheless it is forbidden — and why? And one may answer: we are concerned lest at first there was milk taste in it and that piece was already forbidden, and afterward it discharged from it so that now there is no taste at all — nevertheless, since that piece was already forbidden, it does not return to permission, for this deals when he preceded and removed before it discharges. If so, necessarily there was no taste in it, for if so where did the taste in it go — it does not discharge anything before it rests from its boiling. And one cannot say that it does not discharge full taste but nevertheless discharges weak taste. If so, one may answer: perhaps at first there was full taste and now full taste discharged from it and weak taste remained in it, and therefore its taste is not sensed. If so, it is difficult per our words regarding that which in ch. 25 daf 108 side 1 Rav — a kezayit of meat fell into a cauldron of milk, etc., and challenges: it is nevelah milk, and answers when he preceded and removed — absorbs but does not discharge. And per our words it is still difficult: since there was milk inside the meat, if so even if it only discharges weak taste, why does it not forbid the milk in the cauldron? And one must say: since there is only weak taste, again there is no importance of its species here and it is only like not its species and nullified in sixty. And one may answer: nevertheless it is still difficult regarding that which he wrote that if he removed before it rests from boiling we rely on kafeilah's tasting, and it is impossible that weak taste discharges even before it rests from boiling — why is sixty not required; let us be concerned lest weak taste discharged from it, and on weak taste kafeilah does not sense through tasting. And further, both are milk and one cannot recognize the taste. And one must say: certainly only a slight weak taste discharges from it. And that piece is forbidden is because we are concerned lest that piece received milk taste at first — namely congealed such that when a slight taste is removed from it again its taste is not sensed. If so, we are concerned here lest this slight weak thing discharged from it, and for this reason its taste is not sensed — and if so that piece is properly forbidden. Although Rashi explains on the aforementioned daf side 1 that Rav's statement "since noten ta'am in the piece chatichah na'asah nevelah" refers to the mishnah, and the mishnah deals when part of the piece was in the gravy and part outside the gravy — even though he did not stir and cover at the end, nevertheless we forbid the whole piece, and this is because even without stirring and covering, since part is in the gravy, afterward without stirring and covering it discharges from it. And that they do not combine immediately with the gravy is from this piece, since it is not entirely in the gravy but absorbed in that whole piece before it came to the gravy — but afterward it discharged from it to the gravy and forbids the other pieces. And it is clear from the plain meaning that a drop of milk that fell — if there is noten ta'am — forbids even without stirring at all — in the latter part it teaches stirring and covering, implying in the first part it forbids without stirring and covering; and so it appears Taz explains there — and it appears that if there is not in it, permitted even that piece alone, and why be concerned lest there was taste in that piece and now discharged outside as above. Granted if we explain as Shach wrote that if part in gravy and part outside it does not discharge at all to the gravy except through stirring and covering — if so necessarily the mishnah of the milk drop deals that he stirred and covered at the end — if so one may permit the piece's taste before stirring and there was no taste in it. Not so per Taz's explanation of Rashi that the mishnah deals without stirring and covering, and there is no place to forbid the piece's taste — if so it is difficult, etc. And one must say Rashi follows his view that we do not rely on kafeilah except where there is sixty. If so that which implies in the mishnah "if there is noten ta'am" permitted — it follows there is not sixty in that piece either. If so we say: certainly if kafeilah tasted and said there is no taste, since we already hold there is sixty in it, stam there was never any taste at all and it is permitted even that piece, and we do not say in it that there was taste and afterward discharged. And if so for us who hold by law we rely on kafeilah even when there is no sixty — we do not need Rashi's explanation, for otherwise it would be difficult: if there is no taste in it, why should that piece be permitted? If so one should wonder somewhat at Maharshal and his supporters who ruled like Rashi, since they hold kafeilah's tasting without sixty — it was not for them to rule like him, for otherwise the difficulty as stated applies.
