Some say we state chatichah na'asah nevelah in all issurim, etc. And Peri Chadash ruled thus from Ran's view in Yerushalmi who taught in Orlah: lentils fell into lentils — how much must he add? Rabbi says against all of them, and R' Yosi says against what fell — and this is because chatichah na'asah nevelah, for Rabbi holds against all of them, from which we learn Rabbi holds chatichah na'asah nevelah in all issurim. And this challenge is also for Raavad in his hasagah who holds we do not say chatichah na'asah nevelah except for the view that min b'mino is not nullified — that view is a refutation, for Rabbi holds it is nullified and nevertheless chatichah na'asah nevelah. But it appears for practical law the opposite — the leniency of R' Eliezer from this: for Rabbi holds in Chullin min b'mino is not nullified; if chatichah na'asah nevelah, behold it is min b'mino — and it works out for the view that a thing forbidden due to another thing is called by the name of that species, and therefore lentils forbidden from the lentils are called by the name of the lentils and are species in not its species. But for Rabbenu Tam and Rashbam who hold it is its species — it is difficult, and forced to say terumah lentils are rabbinic; and Tosafot explained above that fish broth is mere steam and is rabbinic, and in rabbinic issur R' Yosi holds min b'mino is nullified, as many sugyot in the Gemara, and one at the end of Beitzah implies that even in rabbinic issur min b'mino is not nullified. Therefore it appears they hold one in its companion does not depend, as Rashba's view — that even though there is no chatichah na'asah nevelah, nevertheless "possible to squeeze it out" forbids — and if so those lentils were forbidden from the start by the lentils and do not return to permission; and even though he adds lentils to nullify the taste of the lentils, nevertheless the bodies of the lentils are forbidden, and therefore Rabbi requires that he add to nullify them one in two, for the bodies of the lentils are forbidden for they absorbed the lentils and need nullification one in two, and min b'mino is not nullified does not apply, for since there is no chatichah na'asah nevelah even Rabbenu Tam concedes it is not its species and nullified; and R' Yosi holds "possible to squeeze it out" is permitted and the lentils were not forbidden and it suffices to nullify the taste of the lentils. And per this that which requires increase for the lentils is not for their taste, for their taste of terumah is the lentils, but it does not become nevelah except due to "possible to squeeze it out" forbids — it is species in not its species, and Rabbi's words are correct. And Shach wrote: that in other issurim chatichah na'asah nevelah is only rabbinic, for the Sages decreed because of basar b'chalav — and so Ran and Hagahot Maimoniyot, etc. And in truth this is not s.v., as Maharai"q wrote explicitly that many hold it is d'oraisa, and there is great practical difference whether d'oraisa or d'rabbanan in many matters.

And behold in Tosafot Chullin daf 108 side 2 s.v. amai they wrote explicitly, and these are their words: but in general chatichah na'asah nevelah is rabbinic and requires five against all of it, for from the Torah one does not need sixty except against the issur absorbed in it, etc. — end of his words. But the matter is difficult, for if so what is the challenge daf 100 s.v. keshekadim, etc., to Rabbenu Tam who says in all issurim chatichah na'asah nevelah — how did they hag'alah vessels from the law of large yorot; and likewise on daf 108 above s.v. shenafel, etc., they wrote in the law that the Torah only forbade beit yomo — they only hag'alah small vessels inside large ones that have sixty, etc. — and the matter is astonishing, for by Torah law there is no chatichah na'asah nevelah at all, and Tosafot contradict their words in one sugya, and forced to say Tosafot hold these were explicit permission in the Torah in hag'alah of the law, for otherwise how did they hag'alah large yorot — the Sages would not forbid what the Torah explicitly permitted — and this is extremely forced.

And one may say that certainly one may say it is d'oraisa and we derive by gezeirah shavah from basar b'chalav — only this depends on the dispute of Abaye and Rava: for Abaye who holds there it is its taste and not its substance, one may derive from basar b'chalav that it is not a novelty, for if so even without noten ta'am also, and if so it is not a novelty and we derive from it ta'am k'ikar — even this is included in the derivation, as there ta'am k'ikar makes it nevelah, so too in all issurim ta'am k'ikar and we make it nevelah. But for Rava who holds from basar b'chalav there is nothing to derive, for it is a novelty — only he derives ta'am k'ikar from elsewhere as Tosafot wrote; if so whence chatichah na'asah nevelah from basar b'chalav there is nothing to derive, and it is rabbinic — and if so that which Tosafot wrote rabbinic is correct per the conclusion that we hold like Rava. But what Tosafot challenged Rabbenu Tam from vessels of the law is for Abaye who also holds chatichah na'asah nevelah, which is what the Gemara answers in keshekadim and removed — and for his view we derive from basar b'chalav and it challenges well. And likewise what Tosafot wrote in s.v. shenafel — all is to settle Abaye's words, and even though Tosafot wrote Abaye retracted, nevertheless Abaye is challenged before his retraction from hag'alah of the law. And if this is correct in itself, nevertheless it is difficult for me that Tosafot's intent should revolve on this, and they should have mentioned — and one may say that certainly for R' Pinchas Kohen's view, as Tur ruled in siman 98, if a kezayit of issur fell in more than sixty, that although forbidden from the Torah, nevertheless if one ate from the mixture a kezayit he is not lashed, for it is not like the substance of issur — but in basar b'chalav if a kezayit of meat fell into sixty zayitim of milk and one ate a kezayit of milk he is lashed, for he ate from the substance of issur — and if so how can we derive chatichah na'asah nevelah from basar b'chalav, there he always eats the substance of issur — obviously chatichah na'asah nevelah; but here we see it is not similar to basar b'chalav, for in more than sixty he is not lashed — see Mordechai who wrote this reasoning explicitly, and learn that it is not the substance of issur and we do not compare to basar b'chalav at all and do not derive from it — and how shall we derive chatichah na'asah nevelah from it that it should be like the substance of issur? Here we see in this matter that we consider it like the substance of issur — they are not comparable. But for Rabbenu Tam who holds ta'am k'ikar — even one who eats a kezayit from sixty zayitim of the mixture is lashed — and if so it is fully comparable to basar b'chalav that it is the substance of issur, and we derive from it in every manner that there is chatichah na'asah nevelah — and if so that which Tosafot challenged in ch. 3 is for Rabbenu Tam as I wrote that it is fully comparable to basar b'chalav; and likewise in the passage beginning shenafel, etc., it is Rabbenu Tam's matter who spoke to the point and it is d'oraisa. But Tosafot themselves hold for halachah like R' Chaim Kohen, as the authors and Tur and Rosh wrote — and if so it is not d'oraisa and it is permitted.

And more it would appear that per the reasoning that a kid the Torah forbade and not milk — if so it is difficult for Rabbenu Tam how it can be that milk is not forbidden, behold the meat became forbidden and behold the milk absorbed from the fat and ta'am k'ikar is d'oraisa to obligate lashes per Rabbenu Tam's views — if so how can it be in reality that milk is not forbidden, and with what did the Torah limit milk from a kid — in the end it is forbidden and one is lashed for the lav of basar b'chalav — and one must say the Torah taught us that in other issurim besides basar b'chalav there is no chatichah na'asah nevelah — and if so there is great practical difference whether milk is forbidden due to itself — if so chatichah na'asah nevelah when two zayitim of milk cooked with a zayit of meat in a pot requires sixty against both zayitim; but if a kid is forbidden and not milk, only milk forbidden that received meat taste — one does not need sixty, only against the absorbed zayit. And per this reasoning in seif 4 it is proven that in other issurim there is no chatichah na'asah nevelah, and that which Rav himself expounded above regarding a piece of nevelah chatichah na'asah nevelah — one must say rabbinic — and these are Tosafot's words, all per the reasoning, but per the conclusion that we hold a kid and milk are forbidden by Torah and there is no limitation — well one may say all issurim of Torah that we derive by gezeirah shavah are permitted, and per the conclusion it does not apply.

But it is difficult for me in what the Gemara challenges: Rav holds a kid the Torah forbade and not milk, and Rav said half a zayit of meat and half a zayit of milk — one is lashed for eating it, and why, etc. And it is difficult for Rabbenu Tam, for milk absorbed issur of meat and ta'am k'ikar for Rabbenu Tam even for lashes — obviously he is lashed — and why is it needed, since it only absorbed from half a zayit of meat, even Rabbenu Tam concedes there are no lashes here, for never was the issur the full measure — for below we establish Rav's words who said one is lashed for eating it when it comes from a large yorah that at first a kezayit of meat and a kezayit of milk whole were cooked — and if so behold ta'am k'ikar and obviously he is lashed per Rabbenu Tam. And one must say in seif 4 reasoning that the Torah limited the milk — even ta'am k'ikar limited that meat taste should not forbid it, for otherwise it is not in reality that a kid is forbidden and not milk. And it challenges well, and if so my above reasoning does not apply — and perhaps this is Tosafot's intent: since the Torah limited that milk is not forbidden due to meat taste, learn the Torah's will is not to forbid meat by its taste at all — this is certainly against reason, that if milk fell in water it should forbid, and if it falls into milk it should not forbid — it is a degradation. And if so this chatichah na'asah nevelah in Torah issurim is clear, for from where shall we learn from meat cooked in milk? There meat does not forbid its mixture at all and there is no ta'am k'ikar d'oraisa in this. And one must say rabbinic.

But in truth it is difficult to reconcile this with Tosafot's words: what proof from other issurim that we say chatichah na'asah nevelah? Granted in other issurim one needs sixty against the absorbed issur d'oraisa as Tosafot wrote explicitly — they were stringent for chatichah na'asah nevelah since ta'am k'ikar is d'oraisa — not so in basar b'chalav per the reasoning that ta'am k'ikar is not d'oraisa and its taste does not forbid at all from the Torah — the Sages were stringent to make nevelah. And although from its place it is decided that Rav said explicitly in basar b'chalav — also one reason it is not comparable, for there meat is chatichah na'asah nevelah which is issur of substance, and here milk is forbidden only due to absorption. And further Tosafot should have brought it from its place where we see chatichah na'asah nevelah is rabbinic, not from other places that are not comparable at all — therefore one must say Tosafot follow their view that there is no lashes in ta'am k'ikar — and if so there is no challenge from a kid and not milk — and if so my above reasoning does not apply; and in any event it appears for R' Chaim Kohen in other issurim it is rabbinic, and for Rabbenu Tam d'oraisa — and so is correct.
