(There) And if it fell in the empty place, etc., and if he pours the food the food becomes forbidden, etc. It deals when there is not in the food sixty-one times sixty slightly less against the drop — for if there is in the food sixty-one times sixty it does not forbid if he pours. Nevertheless l'chatchila one should not pour, for one does not nullify issur l'chatchila — and the same for a new pot that it is forbidden to pour l'chatchila. And Peri Chadash wrote: however, if this vessel is not normally used for a small amount but only in abundance, it is permitted to use it, for impossible to reach noten ta'am as below siman 99 and 122 — end of his words, Acharonim see there. And it appears to me that if it fell not opposite the gravy — we say the drop forbids up to sixty against it — if so it is not a slight issur and it is forbidden to use it l'chatchila; and perhaps Peri Chadash deals with falling opposite the gravy and the like. And Magen Avraham wrote that when fallen opposite gravy, for all views the pot is permitted since here there is only a mere concern lest a slight issur remained in the pot — and this is not like the implication of Beit Lechem Yehudah that for Taz and Shach it is forbidden here too, not like Peri Chadash — and it appears he means even opposite gravy, and one may say: and it appears to me that here in any case it is forbidden to pour l'chatchila even if there is sixty-one times sixty, lest he not pour all at once but a little remains at the end of the pouring until there is not sixty-one times sixty and it forbids — as below siman 127 see there. And it appears that if he already poured and does not know if it remained in the pot or if he poured at once, there is reason to forbid — as proven explicitly in Tur and Beit Yosef and Taz and Acharonim there in siman 107 regarding eggs that were cooked and a chick was found in one of them — we are concerned lest he did not pour all at once and the issur remained without sixty — and all the more so here where whatever remains in the pot is issur — investigate. And know that if it fell opposite the gravy, there must be sixty in the food against the drop — but pieces outside the gravy do not combine to nullify the drop, as I wrote in this siman regarding if a drop fell on a piece outside the gravy that pieces in the gravy do not combine to nullify it — the same here — investigate. However they are not comparable, for there there is also a leniency that pieces in the gravy are not forbidden without stirring as I wrote above in seif 2 — the reason that issur absorbed in a piece does not go out from it to absorb in others without gravy, as proven in the Gemara and poskim, as I wrote there above in seif 4. But here it appears that if there is not sixty against the drop the pot becomes issur and forbids other pieces outside the gravy — for a vessel forbids food without gravy, as I wrote siman 105 seif 7 letter 8 see there. And see siman 94 and siman 69.
