(There in Shulchan Aruch) And likewise if it fell into the gravy, etc. This is Rambam's language. And Tur wondered at him: why need to stir when it fell into the gravy? And it appears to me Rambam deals with thick gravy, as we establish the mishnah in the Gemara in ch. Kol HaBasar (daf 108) for Rav who holds min b'mino is not nullified; and that the braita does not challenge is because he did not hear it, as Tosafot wrote there — and this answer is primary, as written in chiddushim in Sha'ar HaTevunah. And it appears this is R' Yehuda's reason in the Gemara there (daf 109) who holds that even if he stirred immediately, other pieces do not combine to nullify the drop — for he is concerned lest he did not stir well, and that piece on which the drop fell became nevelah and forbids all the pieces because they are its species; for R' Yehuda holds min b'mino is not nullified, and they did not explain why he is concerned lest he did not stir well. And in my humble opinion necessarily R' Yehuda deals with thick gravy, as we establish for Rav there — for if thin gravy, it would be not its species relative to meat, and we say it removed its species, etc., and min in not its species is great upon it and nullifies it — and why does R' Yehuda say it forbids all the pieces because they are its species? If so, since he deals with thick gravy, therefore he is concerned lest he did not stir well well, since it is thick. If so, similar to this the Sages of R' Yehuda also deal with this, and hold stirring helps, for they are not concerned lest he did not stir well; however stirring certainly is required since the gravy is thick — investigate. And it appears to me clear and correct in Sha'ar HaTevunah. And see Beit Yosef who challenged Rambam who wrote "he stirred the pot" — behold we do not nullify issur l'chatchila. And one may say he holds this is not nullification, for he only mixes; and this reasoning Tosafot wrote in ch. 4 of Terumot mishnah 8, and Peri Chadash brought in Orach Chaim siman 453. And greater still Magen Avraham at the beginning of siman Shelah wrote: if his intent is not to eat the issur but only to save the heter through its nullification, it is not called nullifying issur; and if so here too his intent is not to eat the drop of milk but only that the whole meat not become forbidden — and such a case I found in responsum of Maharam of Rothenburg siman 190 — see there. And I saw Peri Megadim here and in Orach Chaim challenged Peri Chadash who brought proof from the mishnah there, which deals only for R' Yehuda and we do not hold like him, as Rambam wrote; and so he challenged in responsum of R' Akiva Eiger siman 77 and did not mention Peri Megadim preceded him. And further he challenged: if so that grinding is permitted since his intent is only to fix — why are basar b'chalav not nullified — slaughter them in order to eat them and they will be nullified by themselves? And so with pomegranates — one may wound them for fixing food — what difference between grinding wheat and wounding pomegranates? And one may say grinding is forbidden since everything mixed together — it is as intending to nullify. And in the end one may say wheat is different, that he grinds everything together — if so there is also permission here. Not so with slaughter of basar b'chalav and wounding pomegranates, where the way is to do one by one, and on each one there is doubt lest it is the issur — his intent is not to fix. Rather he challenged one difficulty: what the Yerushalmi implies, that we only permit to permit regarding meduma because the priests will eventually grind them — and why permit to grind wheat that has shoots? Requires study. And one must say: the reason is still permission in any case. And accordingly there is no contradiction to our master's words here, that he mixes the whole pot together before it imparts taste — it is literally like grinding wheat — requires study. And further I have to say the Yerushalmi that implies forbidding grinding wheat in other issurim is because he considers it intent to nullify, since it is pikuach nefesh. And this is only for the view that nullifying issur is from the Torah forbidden; but per what we hold it is only d'rabbanan — he is not considered as having intent due to pikuach nefesh, for we permit in d'rabbanan.
