(There, in the hagahah) But animal meat one may place near milk if he preceded. Shach wrote that it deals with the manner of cooking, for otherwise also in animal meat it is not forbidden d'oraisa. And it appears that likewise with wild animal meat one must place near it that he preceded, since they touched it on account of marit ayin. And wild animal meat resembles domestic animal meat, as stated in poskim siman 89 seif 2 regarding that which is stated in the Talmud (daf 104) that it teaches: a reward — fowl and cheese are eaten in apikomon, and they wrote that it specifically mentions fowl and not wild animal, whose meat resembles domestic animal meat. And likewise in Bekhorot (daf 29) that deer meat resembles a calf, and in the chapter HaShochet basar in basar they are confused. And it is implied in Tosafot there (daf 104 end of side b) that every fowl that the Talmud mentions there in the entire sugya — for example regarding that it is rabbinic, and likewise regarding raising — so too wild animal. And with this it is resolved why the Talmud there inferred from what it forbids raising regarding fowl meat: learn from this that it is d'oraisa, for if rabbinic, eating itself is a decree and shall we stand and decree a decree upon a decree? And it does not infer thus regarding wild animal meat, as Tosafot wrote: even if we say it is rabbinic, nevertheless it is only one decree, for if they had not decreed on wild animal meat the decree on domestic animal meat would not be fulfilled, for one who sees will think it is domestic animal meat. And likewise regarding this matter — investigate.

And what Shach wrote that also in fowl, which is forbidden rabbinically, marit ayin applies as in all rabbinic matters, etc. — the refutation is: in inner rooms, as Magen Avraham wrote in Orach Chaim end of siman 101. And the sugya in Shabbat (daf 64) is only according to Rav, for according to him it is forbidden everywhere, as Kenat Hagedolah and Tzelach wrote; and see in Behag siman 105 that we rule like Nachum. And likewise Rosh in chapter Chavit and Taz siman 244. And greater than this, Peri Megadim wrote in siman 5 in the name of Perishah that in a Torah eating prohibition they did not forbid on account of marit ayin. And this is not like what Peri Megadim wrote siman 66 that an eating prohibition, even rabbinically, is forbidden in inner rooms. And further one can reject Shach's proof from commerce and sale, for there is on account of deceit d'oraisa lest he write.
